{\rtf1\ansi \deff0\deflang1024{\fonttbl{\f0\froman MS Serif;}{\f1\froman Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f3\fswiss Arial;}{\f4\fnil Wingdings;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green127\blue0;
\red127\green127\blue127;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\s244 \fs16\up6\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext0 footnote reference;}{\s245 \fs20\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext245 footnote text;}{\s252\li360 \b\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext255 heading 3;}{\s253\sb120 
\b\f2\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}{\s254\sb240 \b\f2\ul\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}{\s255\li720 \fs20\lang1033 \sbasedon0\snext255 Normal Indent;}{\fs20\lang1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s2\li720 \v\f2\fs20\lang1033 
\sbasedon0\snext2 hidden;}}{\info{\title Rules for Monopoly}{\subject Windows Games}{\author R. S. Halpenny}
{\doccomm This file holds the rules of the game, as printed in the rule book included with the board game, whether the computer version and the board game are the same or not.  It also has the differences and how to use the computer version.}
{\operator R. S. Halpenny}{\creatim\yr1992\mo9\dy18\hr18\min4}{\revtim\yr1992\mo9\dy22\hr17\min11}{\version30}{\edmins196}{\nofpages18}{\nofwords2298}{\nofchars13289}{\vern16417}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 
\widowctrl\ftnbj \sectd \linex0\endnhere \pard\plain \fs20\lang1033 {\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Monopoly Help Index}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} main_index}}{
\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0005}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Help Index;Index}}{\f3\fs16\up6  }{\b\f3\fs28 Monopoly Help Index}{\plain \b\f3\lang1033 
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\plain \b\f3\lang1033 Rules for Play
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3\uldb Object of Monopoly}{\v\f3 rules_object
\par }{\f3\uldb The Play}{\v\f3 rules_play}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb GO}{\v\f3 rules_GO}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Buying Property}{\v\f3 rules}{\v\f3 _buyproperty}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Paying Rent}{\v\f3 rules_payrent}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb "Chance" and "Community Chest"}{\v\f3 rules_chance_chest}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Income Tax}{\v\f3 rules_incometax}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Jail}{\v\f3 rules_jail}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Free Parking}{\v\f3 rules_freeparking}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Houses}{\v\f3 rules_houses}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Hotels}{\v\f3 rules_hotels}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Building Shortage}{\v\f3 rules_buildshortage}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Selling Property}{\v\f3 rules_sellproperty}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Mortgages}{\v\f3 rules_mortgages}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Bankruptcy}{\v\f3 rules_bankruptcy}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Miscellaneous}{\v\f3 rules_miscellaneous}{\f3 
\par }\pard {\b\f3 
\par }{\plain \b\f3\lang1033 The Computerized Version of Monopoly
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3\uldb What's So Great About It?}{\v\f3\uldb whats_great}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Starting It}{\v\f3\uldb starting_it}{\f3 
\par }{\f3\uldb Playing It}{\v\f3\uldb playing_it
\par }{\f3\uldb Title Deed Cards}{\v\f3 title_}{\v\f3 deed_cards}{\f3 
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Object of the Game}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_object}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0010}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Object of the Game}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Object of Monopoly}{\b\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 The object of the game is to become the wealthiest player through buying, renting and selling property.  
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Playing the Game}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_play}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0015}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Playing the Game}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 The Play}{\b\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 
Player One throws the dice first.  He then moves his token in the direction of the arrow the number of spaces indicated by the dice.  Once the player has completed his turn, play passes to the next player.  The tokens remain on the spaces occupied and con
}{\f3 tinue from that point on the player's next turn.  Two or more tokens may occupy the same spa}{\f3 ce.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 According to the space that his token reaches, a player may be entitled to buy real estate or other properties\emdash or be obliged to pay rent, pay taxes, draw a Chance or Community Chest card, \ldblquote Go to Jail\rdblquote , etc.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 
If a player rolls doubles, he moves his token as usual the sum of the two dice and is subject to any privileges or penalties pertaining to the space on which he lands.  Retaining the dice, he throws again and moves his token as before.  If a player throws
}{\f3  doubles three times in succession, he m}{\f3 oves his token immediately to the space marked "In Jail".
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} The GO Square}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_GO}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0020}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} GO}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 GO}{\b\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 Each time a player's token lands on or passes over "GO", whether by roll of the dice or by drawing a card, the Banker pays him $200 salary.
\par }\pard {\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
However, $200 is paid only once each time around the board.  If a player, passing "GO" on the throw of the dice, lands 2 spaces beyond it on "Community Chest", or 7 spaces beyond it on "Chance", and draws the card "Advance to GO", he collects $200 for pas
}{\f3 sing "GO" the first time and another $200 f}{\f3 or reaching it the second time by instruction on the card.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Buying Property}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_buyproperty}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0025}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Buying Property}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Buying Property}{\b\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 Whenever a player lands on an unowned property he may buy that property from the Bank at its printed price.  He receives the Title Deed card showing ownership and places it face-up in front of him.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If he does not with to buy the property it is sold at auction by the Banker to the highest bidder.  The buyer pays to the Bank the amount bid in cash and receives the Title Deed card for that property.  Any player, including t}{\f3 
he one who declined the option of buying it at the printed price, may bid.  Bidding may start at any price.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Paying Rent}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_payrent}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0030}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Paying Rent}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Paying Rent}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 When a player lands on property owned by another player the owner collects rent from him in accordance with the list printed on the Title Deed card applying to it.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If the property is mortgaged, no rent can be collected.  When a property is mortgaged its Title Deed card is placed face-down in front of the owner.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 It is an advantage to hold all the Title Deeds in a color-group}{\f3  (i.e. Boardwalk and Park Place\emdash 
or Conneticut, Vermont and Oriental Avenues) because the owner may then charge double rent for unimproved properties in that color-group.  This rule applies to unmortgaged properties even if another property in that color-g}{\f3 roup is mortgaged.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 It is even more advantageous to have houses or hotels on properties because rents are much higher than for unimproved properties.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The owner may not collect his rent if he fails to ask for it before the second player following throws}{\f3  the dice.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} "Chance" and "Community Chest"}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_chance_chest}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0035}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Chance;Community Chest}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 "Chance" and "Community Chest"}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 When a player lands on either of these spaces he takes the top card from the deck indicated, follows the instructions and returns the card face-down to the bottom of the deck.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The "Get Out of Jail Free" card is held until used and then returned to the bottom of the deck.  If the player who draws it does not wish to use it he may sell it, at any time, to another player at a price agreeable to both.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Income Tax}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_incometax}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0040}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Income Tax}}{\caps\f3  }{\b\f3 Income Tax}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 When a player lands on "Income Tax"}{\f3 
 he has two options:  he may estimate his tax at $200 and pay the Bank, or he may pay 10% of his total worth to the Bank.  His total worth is all his cash on hand, printed prices of mortgaged and unmortgaged properties and cost price of all buildings he o
}{\f3 wns.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The player must decide which option he will take }{\i\f3 before}{\f3  he adds up his total worth.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Jail}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_jail}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +}
 index:0045}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Jail}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Jail}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\b\f3 
\par }{\b\f3 A player lands in Jail when:
\par }\pard \fi-360\li1080 {\f3 1.\tab his token lands on the space marked "Go to Jail"
\par }{\f3 2.\tab he draws a card marked "Go to Jail"
\par }{\f3 3.\tab he throws doubles three }{\f3 times in succession
\par }{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 When a player is sent to Jail he cannot collect $200 salary in that move since, regardless of where his token is on the board, he must move it directly into Jail.  A player's turn ends when he is sent to Jail.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If a player is not "sent to Jail" but in the ordinary course of play lands on that space, he is "Just Visiting", incurs no penalty, and moves ahead in the usual manner on his next turn.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\b\f3 A player gets out of Jail by:
\par }\pard \fi-360\li1080 {\f3 1.\tab throwing doubles on any of his next three turns.  (If}{\f3  he succeeds in doing this he immediately moves forward the number of spaces shown by his doubles throw.  Even though he has thrown doubles he }{\i\f3 does not}{
\f3  take another turn).
\par }{\f3 2.\tab using the "Get Out of Jail Free" card if he has it
\par }{\f3 3.\tab purchasing the "Get Out of Jail Free" card from another player and playing it
\par }{\f3 4.\tab paying a fine of $50 before he rolls the dice on either of his next two turns
\par }\pard \li1080 {\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 If the player does not throw doubles by his third turn he }{\i\f3 must pay}{\f3  the $50 fine.  He then gets out of Jail and immedia}{\f3 tely moves forward the number of spaces shown by his throw.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 Even though he is in Jail, a player may buy or sell property, buy or sell houses and hotels, and collect rents.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Free Parking}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_freeparking}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0050}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Free Parking}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Free Parking}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 A player landing on this space does not receive any money, property or reward of any kind.  This is just a "free" resting place.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Houses}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_houses}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0055}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Buying Houses;Building Shortage}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Houses}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 When player owns all the properties in a color-group he may buy houses from the Bank and erect them on those properties.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If he buys one house, he may put it on any o}{\f3 ne of those properties.  The next house he buys must be erected on one of the unimproved properties of this or any other complete color-group he may own.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The price he must pay the Bank for each house is shown on his Title Deed card for the property of his complete color-group.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The owner can still collect double rent from an opponent who lands on the unimproved properties of his complete color-group.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 Following the above rules, a player may buy and erect at any time as many houses as his judgment and}{\f3  financial standing will allow.  }{\i\f3 But he must build evenly}{\f3 
 (i.e. he cannot erect more than one house on any one property of any color-group until he has built one house on every property of that group.  He may then begin on the second row of houses, and so on, up to a limit of four houses to a property.  For exa
}{\f3 mple, he cannot build three houses on one property if he has only one house on another property of that group.).
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 As a player builds evenly, he must also break down evenly if he sells houses back to}{\f3  the Bank.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Hotels}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_hotels}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0060}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Buying Hotels;Building Shortage}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Hotels}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 
When a player has four houses on each property of a complete color-group, he may buy a hotel from the Bank and erect it on any property of that color-group.  He returns the four houses from that property to the Bank and pays the price for the hotel as sho
}{\f3 wn on the Title Deed card.  Only one hotel may be erected on any one property.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Building Shortage}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_buildshortage}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0065}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Building Shortage;Buying Houses;Buying Hotels}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Building Shortage}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 When the Bank has no houses to sell, players wishing to build must wait for some player to turn back or sell his houses to}{\f3 
 the Bank before building.  If there are a limited number of houses and hotels available, and two or more players wish to buy more than the Bank has, the houses or hotels must be sold at auction to the highest bidder.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Selling Property}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_sellproperty}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0070}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Selling Property}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Selling Property}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 
Unimproved properties, railroads and utilities (but not buildings) may be sold to any player as a private transaction for any amount that the owner ca get.  However, no property can be sold to another player if buildings are standing on any properties of 
}{\f3 that color-g}{\f3 roup.  Any buildings so located must be sold back to the Bank before the owner can sell any property of that color-group.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 Houses and hotels may be sold back to the Bank at any time for }{\i\f3 one-half}{\f3  the price paid for them.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 All houses on one color-group must be sold one by one, evenly, in reverse of the manner in which they were erected.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 All hotels on one color-group may be sold at once.  Or they may be sold one }{\i\f3 house}{\f3  at a time (one hotel equals five houses), evenly, in reverse of the manner in which th}{\f3 ey were erected.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Mortgages}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_mortgages}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0075}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Mortgages}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Mortgages}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 
Unimproved properties can be mortgaged through the Bank at any time.  Before an improved property can be mortgaged all the buildings on all the properties of its color-group must be sold back to the Bank at half price.  The mortgage value is printed on ea
}{\f3 ch Title Deed card.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 No rent can be collected on mortgaged properties or utilities, but rent can be collected on unmortgaged properties in the same group.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 In order to lift the mortgage, the owner must pay the Bank t}{\f3 he amount of the mortgage }{\i\f3 plus}{\f3  10% interest.  When all the properties of a color-group are no longer mortgaged the owner may begin to buy back houses at full price.

\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 
The player who mortgages property retains possession of it and no other player may secure it by lifting the mortgage from the Bank.  However, the owner may sell this mortgaged property to another player at any agreed price.  The new owner may lift the mor
}{\f3 tgage at once, if he wishes, by paying off the mortgage plus 10% interest to the Bank.  I}{\f3 f he does not lift the mortgage at once he must pay the Bank 10% interest when he buys the property and if he lifts the mortgage later he must pay an }{
\i\f3 additional}{\f3  10% interest as well as the amount of the mortgage to the Bank.
\par }\pard {\b\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Bankruptcy}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_bankruptcy}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0080}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Bankrupt}}{\b\f3  }{\b\f3 Bankruptcy}{\b\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 
A player is bankrupt when he owes more than he can pay either to another player or to the Bank.  If his debt is to another player, he must turn over to that player all that he has of value and retire from the game.  In making this settlement, if he owns h
}{\f3 ouses or ho}{\f3 
tels, he must return these to the Bank in exchange for money to the extent of one-half the amount paid for them and his cash is given to the creditor.  If he has mortgaged property he also turns this property over to his creditor, but the new owner must a
}{\f3 
t once pay the Bank the amount of interest on the loan, which is 10% of the value of the property.  After the new owner does this, he may, at his option, pay the principal or hold the property until some later turn at which time he may lift the mortgage. 
}{\f3  I}{\f3 f he holds property in this way until a later turn, he must pay the interest again when he lifts the mortgage.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 
Should a player owe the Bank, instead of another player, more than he can pay (because of taxes or penalties) even by selling his buildings and mortgaging his property, he must turn over all his assets to the Bank.  In this case, the Bank immediately sell
}{\f3 s by auction all property so taken, except buildings.  A bankrupt player must immediately retire from the game.  The last player left in the ga}{\f3 me wins.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Miscellaneous}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} rules_miscellaneous}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0085}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Miscellaneous}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Miscellaneous}{\f3 
\par }\pard \li720 {\f3 
\par }{\f3 Money can only be loaned to a player by the Bank and then only by mortgaging property.  No player may borrow from or lend money to another player.
\par }\pard {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} What's So Great About It?}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} whats_great}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0090}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 What's So Great About It?}{\b\caps\f3 
\par }{\b\caps\f3 
\par }\pard \fi-360\li720 {\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 meticulously hand-drawn 16-color bitmaps
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 large easy-to-read board with no upside-down text
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 no playing tokens or dice to lose under the sofa
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 the computer is th}{\f3 e banker (read "honest")
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 Title Deed cards can't be chewed up by the family dog
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 can save (and restore) your game any time you want
\par }\pard \fi-360\li720 {\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 high score list keeps the top five highest end-of-game totals}{\f3 
\par }\pard \fi-360\li720 {\field{\*\fldinst {\f3 SYMBOL 168 \\f "Symbol" \\s 9 \\h}}{\fldrslt }}{\f3 \tab }{\f3 consistent, easy-to-use interface}{\f3 
\par }\pard \fi-360\li360 {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Starting Monopoly}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} starting_it}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0095}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Playing the Game}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Starting Monopoly
\par }\pard {\f3 
\par }\pard \fi-360\li360 {\b\f3 To Start the Game}{\f3 
\par }\pard \fi-360\li720 {\f3 1.\tab }{\f3\ul Double-click}{\v\f3\ul mouse_}{\v\f3 double_click}{\f3  on the Monopoly icon
\par }{\f3 2.\tab Choose File/Run from the Program or Fi}{\f3 le Manager menu and type the path followed by the file name:
\par }\pard \fi-360\li1440 {\f3 e.g. C:\\WINGAMES\\MONOPOLY.EXE
\par }\pard {\f3 
\par }{\f3 Once the board is drawn, a windows will appear that asks you how many people will be playing.  Enter a number from 2 to 4.  Enter each player's name when prompted.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 The computer places the appropriate number of player tokens on GO and then you're set up to play Monopoly.
\par }{\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} mouse_double_click}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Double-click}{\f3 
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 To rapidly press and release a mouse button without moving the mouse.  Double-clicking usually performs an action, such as }{\f3 starting a program.
\par }{\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} mouse_click}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Click
\par }{\b\f3 
\par }{\f3 To press and release a mouse button quickly.
\par }\pard \fi-360\li360 {\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Playing Monopoly}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} playing_it}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 
\fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 +} index:0100}}{\f3\fs16\up6 K{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 K} Playing the Game}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Playing Monopoly
\par }{\f3 
\par }\pard {\f3 On the right-hand side of the screen there is a column of boxes with information about each of the players.  Surrounding one of those boxes is a dotted line.  The surrounded box indicates whose turn it is to play.  To roll the dice, }{\f3\ul 
double-click}{\v\f3\ul mouse_double_click}{\f3  the left mouse button on your information box.  Your token is automatically moved to the correct place on the board.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If you land on a proper}{\f3 
ty, a window appears in which you choose to buy the property or not.  If you don't buy it, it is automatically auctioned off to the highest bidder by the computer.  If you do buy it, the Title Deed card is transferred to you.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 Should you land on Chance or Community Chest, the appropriate card will appear.  The computer will take care of moving your token, handling the money, etc. for all of the Chance and Community Chest cards.
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\f3 If you wish to do business during your turn, use the Business menu at the t}{\f3 op of the window.  }{\i\f3 You must do any business }{\b\i\f3 before}{\i\f3  you roll the dice.}{\f3 
  As soon as you throw the dice and buy your property or whatever, your turn is over and the next player's box will be surrounded by the dotted line to signify that he/she has the dice.
\par }{\f3 \page }{\f3\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 $} Title Deed Cards}}{\f3\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {\fs16\up6 #} title_deed_cards}}{\f3\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s245 \fs20\lang1033 {
\fs16\up6 +} index:0105}}{\f3  }{\b\f3 Title Deed Cards
\par }{\f3 
\par }{\b\f3 To See a Title Deed Card:
\par }\pard \fi-360\li720 {\f3 1.\tab }{\f3\ul Click}{\v\f3\ul mouse_click}{\f3  the right mouse button on any of the player information boxes to see which properties that player owns.  Choose one of the properties in the list to see its Title Deed card.

\par }{\f3 2.\tab Click }{\f3 the left mouse button on any property on the board to see its Title Deed card.
\par }{\f3 3.\tab Choose See Title Deed card from the Business menu to get a list of all Title Deed cards in the game.  Pick one to see it.
\par }\pard \fi-360\li360 {\f3 \page }{\f3 
\par }}